## Erica Gates ePortfolio

### Introduction and Professional Self-Assessment

	The Computer Science program at Southern New Hampshire University (SNHU), has helped reinforce my strengths, shaped my professional goals, and prepared me to enter the computer science field. Throughout my CS degree, I’ve learned countless technical and non-technical skills by successfully completing challenging projects in my coursework and developing an ePortfolio, to showcase some of my abilities. Such skills include software development life cycle (SDLC), Java programming, object-oriented programming in C++, Python, data structures and algorithms, databases, collaborating in a team environment, communicating to stakeholders, and security. To collaborate in a team environment, I learned to use Git, GitHub, BitBucket and have shared and uploaded my work to remote repositories. I’ve also learned to work with both relational databases such as MySQL, SQLite, and NoSQL databases such as MongoDB. During my software development lifecycle course, a software testing and QA course, and this CS capstone course I’ve learned to effectively communicate with stakeholders and develop a security mindset. The computer science degree program at SNHU has taught me a great deal of valuable skills to become gainfully employed as a software developer. By exercising algorithmic principles, computer science practices and appropriate standards, I’ve learned to develop and engineer software solutions that deliver value. Most importantly, I’ve gained the ability to evaluate and design solutions that solve a given computing problem using a wide range of innovative techniques, skills, and tools in computing practices.  

 	For my Computer Science Capstone project, I chose to improve upon the Campsite Locator app because there were many components to the application that help demonstrate the full range of my computer science talents and abilities, including data structures and algorithms, software engineering and design, and databases. There were five specific goals to achieve in this capstone project and I will discuss how each of these were met.
  
 	The first goal was to employ strategies for building collaborative environments that enable diverse audiences to support organizational decision making in the field of computer science. I exhibited my skills in building a collaborative environment by providing contextual, in-code comments that result in easily readable and understandable code. This strategy aids in communicating with diverse audiences in the field of computer science, which aligns with this course outcome. I have also created narratives and written this reflection of my capstone project and my experience in the Computer Science program as a whole to prove my ability to communicate appropriately to specific audiences and contexts. This self-assessment communicates my successful achievement of all course outcomes by discussing experiences and best practices learned while working in both collaborative and solo environments 
  
 	The next goal in this CS capstone was to design, develop, and deliver professional-quality oral, written, and visual communications that are coherent, technically sound, and appropriately adapted to specific audiences and contexts. I’ve accomplished this goal by showcasing my ability to understand and conduct code reviews and used oral communication to create a code-review experience of the Campsite Locator app through a video/screencast. I delivered professional-quality oral discussions about the existing functionality of the app by walking through and identifying what the code is, what it does, and how it works. I adapted to my specific technical audience by reviewing the structure, looking for code efficiencies, and checking for comments and code documentation. The written narratives for each of the artifacts also demonstrate my ability to clearly convey my ideas and explain my thought process through written communication. The written narratives describe what my artifact is, when it was it created, and why I chose to include the artifact in my Portfolio. This written communication aids in verifying which specific components of the artifact showcase my skills and abilities in software development.
  
 	The third goal was to design and evaluate computing solutions that solve a given problem using algorithmic principles and computer science practices and standards appropriate to its solution, while managing the trade-offs involved in design choices. I met this course outcome by demonstrating my skills and ability to program solutions to logic problems using data structures and algorithms in the search function of the app. I analyzed my previous design choices in the Campsite locator app and I was able to optimize the algorithms, and reduce redundancy, to create a more robust and efficient design. The search function was updated in conjunction with implementing Recycler View instead of a Linear Layout to display search results. 
  
	The fourth goal in my CS capstone project was to demonstrate an ability to use well-founded and innovative techniques, skills, and tools in computing practices for the purpose of implementing computer solutions that deliver value and accomplish industry-specific goals. I met this course outcome and by using more advanced techniques and tools provided by Android Studio to upgrade the functionality of the app and deliver a more scalable industry-standard software design. Initially, the Campsite search results were limited to display exactly 3 results which did not meet industry standards in software application development. I made use of Recycler View and implemented it in my code to deliver value and accomplish the goal of displaying the accurate number of results. Additionally, the database was updated to be populated with data upon the start of the app so that users did not need to add their own data which adds value and accomplishes industry-specific goals of having a usable database.
	
	The final goal was to develop a security mindset that anticipates adversarial exploits in software architecture and designs to expose potential vulnerabilities, mitigate design flaws, and ensure privacy and enhanced security of data and resources. I met this course outcome by analyzing my software architecture and design, coming up with ways to mitigate design flaws, and proving my ability to find and reduce security vulnerabilities and bugs. I enhanced the security of the password data to help ensure privacy of the Campsite Locator app’s users. Encryption was added to the shared preferences and hashing was added prior to storing the password in the database. I also updated my code and learned to keep a security mindset by adding exception handling to my algorithms when necessary to handle errors gracefully.




### The Campsite Locator App

For my Computer Science Capstone project, I’ve decided to improve upon one multifaceted artifact from a previous course to demonstrate my knowledge and skill in 3 different key areas of computer science which are: software engineering and design, data structures and algorithms, and databases. This artifact is an Android Mobile application that was created throughout my Mobile Architecture and Programming course (CS-360) at Southern New Hampshire University. This app was named Campsite Locator App and, the purpose of the app is to provide users an easy-to-use interface to locate campsites based on their desired search criteria queried from a database of campsites.

### Code Review

View [my Code Review Video](https://youtu.be/-wyqBa1w4jw) to see the original application and the enhancements I planned to complete in this Computer Science Capstone project.

### My Enhanced Artifacts

View the enhancements and updates to my Campsite Locator App's by accessing the repository [here](https://github.com/ericagates/campsite-locator-app).

### My Narratives
#### Software Engineering and Design:
I selected this item because there were many potential improvements to the software engineering and design that could have been made to the project. The specific component of the Campsite Locator App that showcases my skills and abilities in software development is the search results page. The initial application I created (during my CS-360 course) enabled users to search for a campsite by name, feature, or location. However, the results displayed by the app were constrained to exactly three (3) results, even if there were more or less campsites that matched the query, because I had used a Linear Layout. I enhanced the software design by making use of Recycler View provided by Android Studio in the layout xml file so that the search results being displayed were not limited to 3 campsites. I showcased my skills and abilities in software development by changing the software design from a Linear Layout to a more advanced and complicated Recycler View in order to meet the goal of expanding or contracting the display to match the actual number of search results. This reduced the reptitive code and elmininated the need to know the number of results when developing the design, before conducting the search. I also added comments to help adequately document and clearly explain what each section of code accomplishes.

There were many challenges and lessons learned as I improved the search results page of the Campsite Locator app. I learned that there were many components to implementing Recycler View in Android Studio which required me to create additional layout files and classes. I learned that the three main components to implementing Recycler View are the layout manager, the adapter, and the view holder. The most challenge concept to understand was learning how the adapter, view holder, layout file, and search results activity class depended on and connected to each other. I read the Android documentation and watched video tutorials to help conceptualize all the components. Ultimately, I was able to successfully implement the Recycler View and my app now expands or contract the results page accordingly to present the accurate number of results from a query.


#### Data Structures and Algorithms:
I selected to enhance the search results page and the database handler because they are the specific components within the app that showcase my skills and abilities in applying data structures and algorithms to a software application. 
In conjunction with improving the software design component by utilizing Recycler View in Milestone 2, for this enhancement, the data structures and algorithms were developed further to accomplish the goal of displaying all campsite results retrieved from the database. The main data structure used in the Search Results Activity java file of the app was the ArrayList, which is used to store the results from the database query. Initially, the algorithm used a linear sequence of conditional if-statements and numerous variables to extract only the first 3 results from the array list. The algorithm was made more efficient by using if- and else-if statements to call the database handler method and store all the results. By implementing the Recycler View, and adding an adapter, the number of variables required in the Search Results class was reduced while quickly displaying the correct number of results. A sorting algorithm was also added to the search results class so that they are sorted in alphabetical in order. 
Additionally, the algorithm used in the database handler was enhanced by updating the search method to take two parameters instead of one. This optimized the database handler class and made the search method better-organized because condensed blocks of repeated and redundant code into a single procedure. I also added exception handling with try-catch statements to help make the code more secure and handle errors without crashing the app. Finally, supplementary comments were added to both the Search Results and Database Handlers classes to further communicate and clarify sections of  code and improve readability.

There were many challenges and lessons learned as I improved the data structures and algorithms of the Campsite Locator app. The most important lesson I learned was that simpler is better. If there are blocks of repeated code, there are most likely ways to make the algorithm more proficient using loops, conditional statements, and/or adding input parameters. I also learned how to use the built-in Java Collections class to sort the objects in my array list. Again, I learned to not try to reinvent my own sorting methods and chose a more resourceful path. Finally, I reaffirmed the importance of precise and effective commenting to communicate the functionality and reasoning in my coding decisions. The biggest challenge I faced during this enhancement was learning to keep a security mindset and add exception handling to my algorithms to handle errors gracefully. Figuring out where I needed to add try-catch statements was the hardest part.


#### Databases:
I selected to enhance the database in the campsite locator app so that I could implement more secure code, learn more advanced concepts of SQLite with Android Studio, and improve by database skills. The original database was stored locally on the user’s device and did not contain any initial campsite data. Having a database without data does not meet industry standards in software application development. Therefore, I created more robust and efficient code to deliver value and accomplish the  goal of having a usable database. I learned how to add initial data to database so that the app is usable from the start without requiring the user to add their own data to the database. I also added a layer of security to the login information and made the database more secure. This required the passwords to be encrypted and hashed before they were stored on the user’s mobile device. Encryption and hashing both help to maintain the privacy and security of the user’s data. First, I implemented Encrypted Shared Preferences instead of the original shared preferences to store the password in their Shared Preferences file. This allowed the user to save their login info without having to retype in their username and password every time they used the app while reducing security concerns because their information is encrypted while stored on the device. Also, I implemented a widely used cryptographic hash function, MD5, using Java’s API MessageDigest Class to hash the password before storing it in the SQLite database. By using hashing, I improved the security of the app because even if the device was hacked and the database became visible to hackers, the user’s password would be disguised and unable to be decrypted.

The process of enhancing security and modifying the application to include a usable database was the most challenging part of this entire project. As I was improving the security, I learned that there are many different approaches in Java API and other 3rd party API’s to help secure and store information safely. I learned the difference between hashing and encryption and learned that it’s important to know which functions to use, when to use them, and how to properly implement them. Additionally, I learned more about the limitations and intentions behind SQLite. I originally planned to connect my database to the internet so that the information was stored in one central location instead of locally. However, after some research I realized that was not the intention behind SQLite. I found out that SQLite is usually used as a local database and it is not intended to be used as a client/server database so does not support multiple users. In other words, because it’s not a server, I would have to wrap a web service in front of it. Moving forward if I need to have a central database with multiuser access for my Mobile application,  I will probably use online database services such as Google’s Firebase instead of using SQLite.
